how you doing I'm Steve putz and first
and foremost I'm a dad but I'm a bike
builder bicycle builder I've been doing
it as a profession for about 35 years
now since 1980 my love of bicycles goes
back as a kid just exploring the hills
of Mount Tam and when I was very young
my mom passed away and I was sort of a
latchkey kid and the bicycle for me was
kind of my salvation because I loved
Mount Tam I love to fish I love to go
exploring
I'd go bird hunting and all those things
if the bicycle was a great way for me to
get out and explore and I literally felt
like I discovered the Wild West when I
could make it all the way up Mount Tam
and see if only his Ridge and he rich
crest in the alpine lake and all that
when I was 14 I started racing
motorcycles it was a flat track racer
and a motocross er and I turned into an
open expert and when I was 17 I turned
pro and then I started racing the class
8 Pro Circuit which is a miles half
miles indoors and short track and that's
a very fast and very furious and very
taxing serious sport we traveled all
over the country and you know the chance
of getting hurt was always eminent I
continued to ride bicycles and they
became kind of a training platform but
during high school Jill and I didn't
have much contact we were in different
worlds I was around the country racing
through the years of racing the nagging
feeling of tranquility on the bicycle
kept pulling me back in Jo and I got to
be good friends and I helped Joe built
some of his bikes in his shop and we
went to New Zealand and that's when I
went I'm selling everything I own I'm
quitting my job and I'm gonna start
building bikes and I literally sold
everything I had I sold my home I sold
the truck I sold my windsurfer I sold
tools I sold everything I had and I
bought a mill and I bought a lathe and
some welding gear and I rented this
little two-car garage was 35 40 years
ago I started putting tools together to
build bikes and I lived in that garage
for two years with you know a water
faucet out front
she wins shop down the road for the
bathroom and I built bikes and I had no
idea anybody even buy a bike I just knew
that's what I was going to do it kind of
went above and beyond what
dreamed of now wasn't there just in the
shop going oh I mean to build something
or I was just like I'm making bikes Wow
and I got two bucks for a burrito today
so wasn't any expectation to build
anything it was just I just couldn't
stop building bikes and I built a lot of
bikes and it was until 1980 that I
actually built a bike from scratch
this bike is relevant now to anything
out there and will perform better than
anything this was called a limited
edition it's a fully brave bike the two
beings you know it's like oh three five
thick you know the art of this was Phil
appraising and the the whole idea was to
make a filler Debray brass that's how we
joined him was braising them with
locally mean bronze with the torch but
the art was to make a beautiful
transition so the tangent points were
perfect when you have acute angles that
Phil it was a little different the open
angles were a little bit longer but it's
called the Philip raising it's the dying
art form because it is so physically
hard to do all my bikes were built this
way that I built them like this I
probably don't three thousand-plus fill
up Ray's bikes and I used to grind so
much at my hands would go numb your
running air tools at 20,000 rpm today
your hands are like you can't feel them
but I would do all the bikes where I
just sit down and line up twenty or
thirty bikes at once tonight I brace
every joint until I was done and put it
over here the next one and I could work
seven days a week it was just never
enough part of my deal was is I wanted
to be able to make everything I'm I'll
do it myself kind of guy so we made the
head badge we had to use the leftover
brass we weren't gonna waste that we
melted it down and made head badges out
of it we made the stem we made the drop
our shifters we you made the crowns and
made the brakes we made the roller cam
brakes we made the Beast guard hubs we
made the bottom brackets we made the toe
flips I mean there wasn't anything that
we didn't tell me we the seatpost we
made a pump that goes inside
we designed the tires probably one of
the most technically advanced tires in
the last 30-plus years and the ground
control tire turned out to be the
biggest selling tire in bicycle history
and the longest selling tire and it set
the bar for other tires and we did 23
tire designs were specialized and it
really built their company and kind of
pave the way for our licensing
things we got to do this original fork
is a Charlie Cunningham design one of
the magical things about Charlie and I
we were we started W TV together Charlie
is really a brilliant guy and he's a
get-it-done guy but he's like once he's
done with that he's like ready to go for
a ride and I have a little different
talent which is looking at it and
learning how to make it in an efficient
way
so it's aesthetically beautiful so it's
structurally strong and so it's a
finished product and it's got all the
pain lines and everything it's really
hard to beat clean and simple it's no
more or no less than it has to be to do
the job and actually that's what the
bicycle represents it represents a
freedom in transportation in hell I've
always enjoyed that aspect I've never
been at bells and whistles guy I'm more
of a passion guy and so when somebody
buys one of my bikes are getting my
hours so getting my labor my mindset and
Charlie's mindset was how we could make
bike parts that last forever of course
we were told how stupid we were by the
very top engineers of another great
cycling component company who said why
would you want to do that don't you want
to make next year's model and we're
thinking no we want to make bike parts
that last forever and he goes that's not
a very good business plan I mean see
things differently when you do it all
yourself you want to be efficient it's a
great feeling to pass on to I also
realize that if you really love
something you can just do it if you love
it enough it's just contagious people
kind of blown away that I would give up
so much information but the way I see it
is if you know if you play the piano you
can sit next to a really good piano
player and they can teach you everything
they know but you still have to go home
and practice 10 hours a day so I'm fine
teaching people anything I can do to
help them along I want to see people
become strong and making
doing a good job at raising the bar but
I have so much to learn it's ridiculous
if you stopped paying attention as the
day's top price I have these two young
boys they both want to do stuff they
like bikes and of course I have this
machine shop that was in our house at
the time and I started watching my place
and they were doing things that I never
taught him but I did I have to stand
absolutely honor that they want to learn
what their dad knows and when they can
look up to you and respect you or you
can see they try to weld a bike or they
try to do this and they see how hard it
is and then they look at my work and
they go and dad must assure messed up a
lot of bikes to get that good or I
wonder if he slept very much I mean it's
amazing you get to ride with your kids
for one moment near life because when a
little kid you're going come on come on
you guys come on
and then one day they write write that
right past you and they say hey Dad
how's it going it was an extra little
bonus I wasn't expecting in life to be
able to pass that money my boys that
that I work really hard at that they
want to learn
you